[Music]
I want to bring people to their own
wisdom and I don't want to bring people
to my wisdom or somebody else's wisdom
or group wisdom
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease I'm Brett Kistler
here today with my co-host Joe Hudson
[Music]
we're talking about the vow and Cults
and some of the people coming back into
AOA from from having done ESF and other
other kinds of work and there's like a
tongue-in-cheek thing that sometimes
people joke about like oh I'm back in
the culture this is a culture this is
not a cult or a question for you that
somebody asked that was tongue-in-cheek
was like What if you just stopped
resisting that you're a cult leader it's
funny like as soon as you say this
and I know that it's being recorded I
become self-conscious and I become and
I'm like I don't even want to put that
thought in anybody's mind and I don't
know if it's a semantic thing if like
what other people use the word cult it
means one thing and in my mind cult
means another thing like I don't know if
it's even generational
but to me the essence of a cult is where
you're handing over your power to
somebody else which is the antithesis of
the work that I want to do in the world
by the way I I don't think that
all cults are bad and I actually think
that there are things that are Cults
that we don't call Cults like I mean
I've definitely been in companies that
have a very kind of cult-like thing
where it's like very hard to leave and
it's
it's there's only one way of thinking
and descent is is not appreciated and so
I've definitely seen it and in places
where people don't like political
systems of like some deep cult-like
behaviors
but it's such an antithesis of what I
want to be doing in the world that I'm
just like I just don't want an
association with it which is there's
something in it for me in that yeah for
sure there's there it brings me back to
something that you said once about like
when we did our one-on-one session that
was recorded there was a thing that you
said where I was feeling a lot of
tension you were like well tension if
you took all the tension out of a cell
it would die attention is part of the
system
and I'm seeing this here like in in any
group there is there's like a desire
within the people of the group to
start to surrender to the group be like
please just solve my problems meet all
my needs make my decisions uh make make
life easy for me and heal me change me
especially in personal development type
groups uh there's there's that
particular Force that's like kind of
driving towards group cohesion and
towards group healing and as it does
that there's some
some levels of like critique and
critical thinking or
personal wants and needs can start to
slowly fall to the Wayside and so then
there's this other opposing Force which
is I think the one that you're living in
a lot whenever somebody brings up aha
this is a cult and you're like oh I
don't even want to use that word
um which is like no no no we want
everybody to have their own autonomy we
want everybody to have their needs met
and not sacrifice a large portion of
their needs so that the group can as a
whole get like a small sliver of needs
met and then completely be unhealthy and
whatever in other ways right um so yeah
there's this there's a tension I also
see that when groups subjugate
themselves for the group there is no
healing that happens like as people in a
group subjugate their needs for the it's
like it just creates trauma it doesn't
actually create healing
and yeah I think there's a tendency for
it I think it's very similar to the same
tendency that two people get into a
relationship and both of them
start making
sacrifices to their authenticity to make
sure the other person is happy or stays
happy you know walking on eggshells or
saying the exact right thing or you know
doing whatever they need to do so the
other person doesn't get upset with them
or angry at them or it you get sad or
whatever it is and I think it's the same
thing that happens and I think it's
really unhealthy in a relationship and I
think it's really unhealthy in a group
at the same time there's no judgment
towards it in my system but there is an
a deep dislike for that kind of
like dislike as in
I don't like the taste of that yeah like
just like I don't know yeah I don't like
cooked fish yeah and I don't want to eat
cooked fish I'll eat raw fish it's like
that there's that to it I think the
other thing
that bothers me about the cult thing and
I'd love to just to explore this because
like I said I know there's something in
this for me
is that what I notice is that when
people get involved in these programs
they have a way of interacting with each
other which is deeply fulfilling people
come and say
I really miss doing the work I really
miss the groups you know people who do
this work together stay friends for now
five six years and they get to know each
other in the community builds and
there's nobody telling them what to do
no leadership in it they're just enjoy
it
and it feels to me that like to say this
is like cult Behavior it diminishes it's
saying that like we can't be this way
naturally we can't just be happy
naturally we can't just be deep and
intimate naturally it's oh it's only
okay because we're in this cult there so
there's
there's something about that
tongue-in-cheekness
which I think dismisses the idea that
this can be your life this is my life
right this is many people I know his
life who's never done this work
there's something in me that's like hey
hey don't dismiss don't nah like don't
like like oh that only could happen in
Vegas no it can happen any goddamn place
you want it to happen it's like this is
your life
so there's something in that that also
kind of I get a little defended towards
I'm like wait hey oh so there's a
there's this idea that can happen when
you when you find a group and a set of
tools that brings you to a deeper place
of self-acceptance and self-love and
your life starts changing there's a
stage in that where you believe that
these tools and these people are either
required for it or just that you're far
more likely to get it if you're with
those people so it starts to create the
sense that there's a boundary between us
and then everybody else who's not on
this page and that's that that is the
thing that just happens anywhere in any
group a sports team you know fans of the
Browns anything it's like these are our
people those are the other people you
know like our religion is the ones that
eat chicken the other religion is the
ones that eat pork
and so it starts to create this boundary
and
there's something in the way that you
relate to this which is well like even
if we're playing with the idea that this
is a cult or not a cult or you know
letting ourselves play with the idea of
you know letting the concept of cult
show up in our jokes so that we are at
least self-referential and self-aware of
the tendency that we might have to
become insular
um but that there's also still this I've
never hold on I've never thought about
it that way I've never thought about it
that way so what you're basically saying
like on some level the jokes are
potentially the jokes are
a way to it keeps it in Consciousness
that
like it creates an awareness of it so
that it doesn't get out of hand
potentially yeah and that actually makes
me really appreciate it in a different
way I hadn't thought about it that way
yeah I think it also kind of puts a
little bit of a framing around the kind
of behavior that might occur if you if
you show up like for for a group of us
that moved to Hawaii recently and we
moved to Hawaii and we have a particular
way of relating with each other and they
have these tools and some people would
come and hang out with us and they would
just see us doing things like
differently and we would like go deep
into emotions and with this particular
techniques
and like we actually had a couple people
sort of be like are you guys a cult and
so it's like if we were just like
defensive like no we're not a cult like
then that would be like sort of uh I
don't know maybe a red flag so what's
the answer what do you say I mean the
answer is like well I don't know like if
if things got out of hand we could let
ourselves accidentally devolve into a
cult if we weren't actually careful
because it is easy to recognize that you
know this group has something that I
need
and that I want that seems to be
filling my needs more than I found other
places and then I start getting attached
to the group and then my fear my control
mechanisms start coming in and then
somebody might start trying to control a
group and then people might sacrifice
themselves for the group cohesion
because the group is so important and it
feels like you're not going to get it
elsewhere which goes back that thing
where you were saying which is buying
into the story that all of life can't be
of work right right right right and so
there's there's a tendency that that
could just happen if you're not watching
for it and so there's I think there's a
way that being kind of self-aware of
like well
we have a different culture developing
in this group of people than is the
broad culture out there and that might
mean others project called onto US
and that might also mean that we
accidentally start exhibiting those
behaviors yeah what's interesting to me
here is that so I watched the The Vow
thing and some of the tools that the
values are similar to some of the tools
that we use and so
like I remember the immediate response I
watched it with Tara my wife and our
immediate response was just like mine
more than hers as like I just don't want
to do this at all I don't like give up
the business like maybe I won't even
coach like I don't want anything to do
with this
and I was having a hard time and I
remember watching it I'm like well where
does the cult began and where does it
call end you know and I was like looking
okay so then I started doing the
research on the cult stuff and and the
high control groups and then I started
seeing it everywhere like
and I remember this one scene in The Vow
where
the Dalai Lama is talking to Keith
Ranieri
and the Dalai Lama has a problem with
the thing and everybody's like oh this
is a problem then he gets you know
talked out of the fact that it's a
problem and he goes oh and then
everybody goes ah and I'm like wow it's
like one cult talking to another cult
yeah now obviously there's huge
differences between the two and
and I really
like what one has done in the world and
I like some of what another has done in
the world and some of it I dislike but I
saw it in companies I saw it in
political groups I just saw that that
this Behavior kind of almost everywhere
and and I remember after watching it
there was kind of a
this thing that happened to me is almost
like a oh there's just no way to do this
that was kind of like a giving up or
something there's something in me that
was just like
no matter what you do humans will make
it a cult like no matter and by humans I
mean me I'm not I'm not excluding me
from that um
so I was just like well no matter what
you do like this is what it devolves
into because or evolves into but it
because people like to have clear
understanding of what's going on they
like to have rules they like to have
hierarchy
and so that was like that was the Arc of
my Adventures watching that and somehow
or another in there when I started to
really research
I remember I I like 25 things that let
you know that you're in a high control
group or a cult
and I was like oh we don't do that we
don't do that we don't do that we don't
do that we don't do and all of a sudden
I saw oh this there is a distinction and
this is the difference
and that's the only thing that actually
I think
got me interested in doing the work
again because it was so much like
not wanting to
I want to bring people to their own
wisdom and I don't want to bring people
to my wisdom or somebody else's wisdom
or group wisdom
and
I sometimes don't see my own wisdom I
see the group wisdom or someone else's
wisdom like it's something that is
impossible to completely
let go of so it's it's it's an
interesting Journey for me
and I wonder how much of the word is
like charged I think about like the word
narcissist the words narcissist and
victim
they were like they were bad words in my
head like if you're a victim that's a
like and or you're a narcissist and then
seen like oh no we're all narcissists
we're all victims there's no bad word
here
and I haven't found the place where cult
isn't a bad word
like in my world like there's I don't
see the place where
um giving up your will
to a group is not a
a bad thing the funny thing is the thing
that hits me first is that giving up
your will generally is a beautiful thing
as a matter of fact I think that
that level of surrender
is like one of the most enormous gifts
I've ever had in my life
but it wasn't to a guru and it wasn't
too uh
a group of people and it wasn't too uh
and so I think about something Gareth
who runs this thing conscious culting
says is like what happens if you're
surrendering consciously
with the full understanding that there's
imperfection
on all sides of it
even there I would say it's far better
to surrender
to the ineffable than it is to a person
well the the ineffable that's one of
those things that I could imagine
somebody hearing can be like what the
[__] does he even mean by that but I I I
see something here that you've said
before like surrender but like you this
this way you have this feeling about
this word surrender that it's like well
I don't like the way people use it
normally because it's like what are you
surrendering to
and so I'm seeing maybe a distinction
between surrendering to something
outside of yourself that is not tapped
into your wisdom and some surrendering
to whatever is actually coming from
within you and through you
and so that that brings me into
something that actually really relates
this sort of unavoidable phenomenon of
group cohesion into cult behavior that
just exists in all humans even if you
become part of the cult of personal
development gurus who doesn't want to be
a cultist
um which could be its own cult right
yeah no way out no way out and so on on
some level there's this fundamental
pattern in life to self-organize into
structure structure becomes control
becomes rigidity
and that can occur on a group level but
it can also occur on an intra-personal
level inside us and that's actually what
a lot of this work is to recognize where
in some sense we are
a cult of one with our own beliefs and
our own sub selves and like parts that
are colluding in some cult-like way to
be us against the world and the the work
itself is to be swimming Upstream of
that
and finding what's underneath it and
relaxing those constraints and finding
and letting letting a broader
intelligence come through right so that
that's just I heard so much joy
in me right now hearing that like that I
love that
how you've turned shown that the cult is
a projection of the internal cult and
how our internal structure is very
cult-like we have a guru that's the
voice in the head that says things and
we believe it with a without questioning
whatsoever I just love the whole thing
so if I if I want to take the principle
and say okay so if if my internal world
is
that of abuse then I look outside and I
see the external world as abuse if my
internal world is one of love then I
look outside and I see that the external
world is one of love
like I see that how love Acts
so the question I have for myself is if
I am
rejecting
the cult externally if I'm rejecting the
cult externally because I'm not sure if
I'm entirely rejecting it but let's just
assume that I am
or the charge to the word I'm definitely
rejecting one of those things then I'm
rejecting that in myself I'm rejecting
so what does it mean to reject the cult
in myself
like
because the fact is if there wasn't that
cohesion
if there wasn't like this is the world
view that I hold
then
there'd be like a deeper level of
collapse it would almost like feel like
you lose your Center
anyway hold on yeah which I mean every
major transformation has been losing of
the center
or the fear of losing of a sinner so
there's some level that each of us is
afraid of losing the center for a reason
because we could just fully dissolve and
yet dissolving is exactly
the direction that is most healing for
most of us to go yeah not all of us
so the way I'd be thinking about is like
I'm a cult of one and that's okay
there's like a tremendous amount of Joy
with that statement and there's also
like a a nervousness
huh
I'm a cult of one and that's okay is
like
it's like somehow I Define myself
incorrectly
somehow I Define myself incorrectly as
as someone who can almost entirely see
through my own belief patterns
so it's like it's almost like an
acknowledgment and a okayness and a love
of the fact that I can't see through my
own
there are ways that I can't maybe every
way I can't see through
my own belief patterns
I was like I'm sitting with that I want
to see what that does to the
I'm going to say it again
I'm a cult of one and that's okay
yeah what turns in me is like
it's almost like there's no group of
people who don't have a set of beliefs
that they it's like seeing the humanity
of cult
and it reminds me of this thing when I
saw the whole The Vow
when I saw it the first time or the only
time
I remember
thinking to myself a couple things like
wow they get so much good goodness out
of this there's so much goodness out of
this
and then the next thought was like why
do you have to mess this up
you know like why why did anybody and
and then
the other thing that I saw was like oh
everybody
is in a cult
like the cult of materialism The Cult of
you know the cult of Technology the cult
like there's there's just major thought
processes and and if you went out into
society and said I'm gonna just give up
all technology
you would just the society would be like
what the [__] and they would call you a
cult and they wouldn't see that they're
the cult as well
and so yeah I think there's a freedom
that comes with this of saying that oh
I'm a cult of one and that's okay that I
no matter how hard I try I will never
ever be able to see
I will never be able to see
the water that I swim in a
characteristic of the experience of
being in a cult must be that there's
parts of you that are aware that you're
being controlled or that you're allowing
yourself to be controlled
and those parts are being resisted and
dissociated so I'm curious in you in
this I'm a cult of one like you have
this belief that I will never be aware
or I don't see through but what about
the part of you that does see through
whatever sliver of
the structure you think you have oh
that's how I identify it's the
destruction of that identity that is I
think that cult meaning that like I
identify as
somebody who can see through it
it's the death of that identity
and I agree I mean I agree that all of
us see through it and I also agree that
all of us are ignorant
there's definitely just some stuff that
we can't like we don't know what life
would look like if we didn't have eyes
but we had
different sensory organs like we are
limited in our ability to understand by
the nature of our organism if nothing
else
by the colors that we see but that
that's an extreme version there's so
yeah that's it's an interesting thing
it's just literally it's like the death
of the identity of
yeah I can see through stuff and I can't
see through stuff that there are there
are ways in which I am open-minded ways
in which I'm not open-minded and that I
can't even see the ways that I'm
closed-minded in some cases and I can
see the ways I'm close-minded sometimes
and I'm trying to ignore them
yeah which is a necessary thing to do in
order to weave our experience together
into any cohesive story that can even
have any consistent
plot line at all there has to be
information that's lost and that is
essentially
some micro level of cult Behavior inside
ourselves yeah okay so let me test it
say give me a cult joke or something
like that about this work being a cult
and I wanna
I wanna feel what happens in my system
yeah so we're getting a bunch of shirts
made with your face on it and
like we're gonna save the world uh
one Joe at the time oh so you got you
got the double duty on me yeah even the
saving the world part of it uh
there's more humor in it for sure I can
laugh at it
I couldn't laugh so easily at it
recently so that's that's a good sign
yeah I had this idea though if we ever
did have a center if if there was ever a
place where everybody was coming
together to do this work consistently
that we would have a picture of a guru
on the wall in like five or six places
but every month it would change
so we would just pick one of the people
and like put them in the guru picture so
and at least two of them would be
cartoons or like some mythical animal
yeah yeah awesome yeah that's great all
right thank you thank you thank you
thank you for that that was really fun
yeah enjoyed it
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
foreign